>> Richard Feldman: All right,
now you might notice that we have
some more includes than last time.
So one of the clues that I want
to kinda shout out here is this
is how old [LAUGH] C is.
This is arpa/inet.h.
So, the ARPANET,
these like the original internet,
like the precursor to the worldwide web,
this is how old school this stuff was.
Like they were using C in fact.
On the arpa/inet.
[LAUGH] that's how old this stuff is.
And guess what?
It still works in 2025.
Very cool, all right.
So as usual, we're just gonna start
by building and running the program.
There we go.
And now it just says
listening on port 8080.
So, let's see what is actually
happening on port 8080.
So, if I go to local host 80 80,
it says, hey, this is the root /page.
There's nothing here except a blog.
Now, if you may recall what was actually
happening here is where was that?
Index.html, right?
So, this is the root/page.
There's nothing here except a blog.
Hello everyone.
I'm gonna just do that,
not gonna restart the server.
I just saved that file and we go back
here, refresh the page, and bam,
there it is.
So that is what we've
built up to today [LAUGH].
We've got a real static HTTP server.
We're gonna make it better in the next and
final part of the course.
But, but hey, it actually works, and
it's not actually that much C code.
Like if we look at this file,
this is only like 220 lines of C code.
Now granted, there's a lot of edge
cases we're not handling here.
This actually doesn't support images yet.
We're going to get to that in the next
section, but it's pretty impressive.
Like that this is all it takes to build
a really, really high-performance,
like C web server.
Yes, some of the APIs
are a little bit funky.
Yes, we're doing a lot of weird
stomping all over memory kind of tech.
Techniques in here, but if you want to
get down to it and like really like get
close to the operating system,
this is what that looks like, all right.
Now I do want to notice,
sorry, that was from earlier.
We are getting a number of HTTP
500 internal server errors here.
Now this might kind of surprise
you because on the one hand, well,
first of all,
I didn't actually go over the.
Part of the code where we are,
in some cases we're turning at 500, so
we'll look at that in a second.
But also you might be, yeah,
what's going on with that?
Because, I mean, clearly the browser
doesn't think there was an error like this
was, it's just like worked.
So what's going on there?
So, if I refresh this page,
I might notice,
what's that little thing down there?
Let me zoom in for you.
This is something that we
don't actually have right now.
Support for images includes support for
the favicon.
So, favicon is a fun little one to debug.
If you're not familiar with this, this is
something the browser automatically goes
and tries to get, to make
the little icon in the browser tab.
So, if you don't either have one or
at least have your server able to be
aware of the possibility that we're
going to get one of these things,
then by default, what you're going
to get is some sort of error.
You might be wondering, like,
why is it printing so many of those?
Like, if I refresh the page, I get two,
500 internal server errors, not one.
We'll talk about that in a second.
All right, so going through this
code in part five exercise.
This is all just like exactly the same
stuff that we went on the slides,
except now it's all sort
of spread out here.
We're doing the handle request thing.
This is our little helper function that
does take the request and the socket and
like calls to path on it.
This is basically just like I just
split out a helper function, so we can
sort of isolate the request quest handling
code in here, just for code organization.
But otherwise the same exact
stuff we did in the slides.
We are doing a little like,
okay, if I open this path and
I get file descriptor is -1.
Then we want to handle the case
where it's a 404 differently and
not just like, always do a 500.
The only issue is that this is not
actually like printing a response to
the socket.
It's just printing it to
standard out with a printf.
So, what we're gonna do in this part of
the exercise is actually like respond with
one of these things.
So instead of a 500 internal server error,
we wanna return a 404 not found.
Down here, again, we're just like printf,
if we fail to get the stats on this thing,
then again, we do actually
want to print a 500 error, but
we wanna return that error to the browser,
and once again, same pattern here.
So basically, the theme of what we're
doing here is we have a number of
cases where what we're doing is currently
just printing it to standard out.
And what we want to be doing instead is
just actually sending it to the socket.
>> Richard Feldman: All right,
let's go through the solution.
Okay, so a bunch of the stuff unchanged
from previous like two path works the same
way as before, fundamentally.
Handle requests is our little
helper function here for
just dealing with the request stuff.
The theme here is that we've got all these
like different error scenarios that we
want to handle properly.
So for example, in this case,
we've got HTTP 400 bad requests.
So what does that mean?
This means that when we called to path,
to path, returned null.
So here we've essentially done that
same kind of C style error handling.
That we've seen in all these PIs we've
been using, where basically you may
recall, if we didn't have enough space
to write this thing, meaning that we
got a weird request that didn't have
like enough space to write this thing.
Or if we got something that didn't
have the space where we expected it,
like the file ended
before we hit the spaces.
In either case,
that means this is an invalid request, and
two path would have returned null.
And here we're just basically doing that
same exact error handling case where we're
like, yeah, let's see if what this
function returned gave us an error code,
in other words, a null address here,
or a null pointer.
And basically, we're like, yeah, okay, now
we need to propagate this error properly.
So how are we going to do this?
Well, we're gonna send this bad
request header back to the browser and
essentially say, okay,
I'm gonna do a write and
write takes as its first argument,
the file descriptor.
So, this is gonna be socket FD.
And then basically if we want, we can do
like the know, sterling of that thing.
Or if we wanna be like
a little bit fancier about it,
we can kind of put this up here and
say like const char star,
error 400 or
something like that equals that.
And then down here,
we can just do strlen of that one.
There you go.
So, this is basically a pretty
straightforward pattern for
just sending like a 400 error.
If we have something that we are dealing
with a lot, like we are with 500 errors,
we might even wanna make a little helper
function, which I'm gonna do in a sec,
to just like do this right for me.
Okay, next one here.
This one's actually kind of cool
because it's pretty easy to reproduce.
So, when we get this working,
we will actually get a 404 Not Found.
So, if we just do, let's say I open
up my browser and I'm like, okay,
I would like to open up localhost/foo.
And it's like, well, hang on a sec.
That's like, Foo is not a thing, so
it's like cool 404 Not Found for that.
Now, by the way, I'm gonna not
touch my keyboard for a second, and
you might be a little bit
surprised that even though.
I am not touching my keyboard.
All right, I might need to, sorry,
I might need to do that over again.
Okay, I'm gonna local host for
yeah /foo not touching the keyboard.
And yet
we're still getting like 404 coming in.
So what's going on there?
Why did we just get a 404 on my
hands weren't even on the keyboard.
Does anyone have any guesses
as to what's going on there?
>> Speaker 2: The browser retrying.
>> Richard Feldman: Yes, this is, this is
easier to tell if you use Wget here, and
Wget is basically gonna actually,
like, tell us what it's doing.
I need to actually be running the server.
So run this on a different one.
It's basically, hey,
HTTP request sent a rating response,
no data received retrying,
retrying, retrying, retrying.
And the reason for that is that I'm
printing out 404, to standard, out, but
I'm not actually telling
the server anything.
So the server is not
getting any response here.
It's just like, hey, hello.
What's going on?
And it's just like, times out.
It's like, well, hang on,
let me try again.
Hang on, let me try again.
So, the browser is the same thing,
it just doesn't have as much of it.
Delay as Wget does in
between retry attempts.
But not to worry, because once we
actually like respond with this,
then we're gonna be okay.
So, I'm going to basically just do
the same like pattern that I did here.
So, this is going to be 404 Not Found, and
I'm just gonna follow exactly the same
pattern that I did back there, where I'm
just gonna write to but instead of error
404, it's gonna be, sorry,
instead of error 400, it's gonna be 404.
So, we're gonna do that and then we do
the same thing over here with 500, okay.
And now, it's gone there.
Yeah, I didn't actually
define the error 500.
Let's go ahead and do that.
Okay, there we go, cool.
I'm using Zed's fancy autocomplete there,
so I to save myself some typing there,
but you get the idea 400, 404, 500, etc.
And then basically we're
just gonna write these here.
Okay, so now when I restart the server,
now we should get something much
more semantically familiar.
If I go to localhost.com,
port 88/foo, we get, hey,
page can't be found because the browser
actually knows when I get a 404 back.
Here's what I do.
I display, you know, HTTP error 404 and
good stuff like that.
And now we are not actually going to see
all these things spamming us locally,
because when the browser gets a 404
it knows what to do with that.
It's like, yeah, got it.
This is a 404 error.
I'm very familiar with these.
I don't need to retry because we
actually did send it a response in that
scenario now.
All right, looking good.
So that's definitely an improvement.
Let's keep going.
So, at this point, we might notice
a pattern here where it's like, okay,
this one's gonna be a 500 error.
This is like if fsat failed.
So, this means that like we were able to
open the file because if we weren't able
to open the file, then we would have 404.
I forgot to mention, by the way,
this is another beautiful
C error-handling pattern.
So, if fd=-1,
that tells us it's an error, but
it doesn't tell us what
type of error we have.
That is the open function will set,
will mutate this magical
global variable called errno.
This is not something that we wrote.
This is just a magical global.
And the way that errorno works,
it's sort of like error number is when
you call a function that can
error in a particular way.
The way that you check whether this
function failed was look at it as a string
value and see if it was negative one.
If it was negative one, then you go look
at errorno before calling another function
that does that, or else,
you're gonna be in big trouble.
Because it's gonna stop all over it.
And then in that magical
little window between when you
called one of these functions and
you called another one,
errno will be set to whatever the most
recent way that one of these failed was.
And this will tell you
what the actual error was.
And ENOENT, and
I'm not sure why exactly that.
I remember at some point I knew
the history behind why it was called that.
But this is like,
basically means file was not found.
So, if you ever use no JS,
you actually can see this.
Sometimes you see, like,
the console, like an error,
like, no end, or something like that.
And that's because no JS is sort
of uncritically passed along
the the like C style
error from this thing.
So, if it's one of those errors, then
we're like, okay, 404, meaning not found.
So, this bit basically means like
we attempted to open that path.
So in this case, when I went to local host
8080/foo, we'd be coming through here.
The path would be foo/index.html.
But since I don't have a directory
called foo or a index.html within it,
when I try to open that, this fails.
FD is negative one errorno is set to Eno,
end, meaning that it was file not found.
And therefore we know to send, backup 404.
If it was anything else, like the file was
there, it was found, but we couldn't open
it, for some strange reason,
like a permissions issue, or something,
then we're gonna call that an internal
server error, and send backup 500.
And a lot of these are going to be 500s.
Like if we were able to open the file, but
fstat on it failed, for whatever reason.
Again, 500, internal server error.
What happens if we attempted
to write to the socket and
writing to the socket failed, even
though reading the file succeeded again,
500 internal server error.
Now, there are so many of these things
that at some point you start to be like,
okay, maybe rather than, like, duplicating
all of this write logic over and over.
Maybe I should just actually extract
a little helper function for this,
which I think is, like,
perfectly reasonable.
Let's say I wanted to just make
a little helper function for this.
One of the things we would probably wanna
do is even though we're not using it here,
is I would actually like to return, like,
pass along the return value of the write.
So that's an size t.
And I'll just call this like write 500.
So, it takes socket, int, socket, good.
And then we need the actual like,
sorry, this is the 500, so
we actually don't need that.
We know that.
So basically, what I'm gonna do is I'm
gonna say return, whatever right return.
So that way if we do decide we want to
handle that error, we have the ability to,
and then it's just gonna
be this exact thing.
So now that we have.
I can replace this with that socket-fd,
okay, great.
And then now every time I
see one of these things,
I can just do a nice little one of those.
Well, yeah, I guess we, right.
We do want to early
return when that happens.
So, we wanna like exit instead of just
printing this one's already like,
returning negative one.
Yeah, I guess if, okay, never mind.
We do want to return negative one to
indicate to the caller that we that
we failed.
So that's fine.
Okay, so we can do that.
Or we could have write 500 return
negative one and just return that.
But I think it's probably
more idiomatic to just like,
propagate the error in case we
do want to handle it separately,
like maybe writing it to a log file or
something like that.
But yeah, I mean, all of these being 500s,
now we have our little helper function.
Nice and easy and there we go, great.
Now you might notice that over
in this section of the code,
like this is a actual main, like before
we're doing the handle request stuff.
We do have error handling
around all these things,
which we didn't talk about in the slides.
These do not actually send a 500 error.
Can anyone think of why we don't do that?
>> Speaker 3: We didn't even
get to start the server.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Speaker 3: Probably the most thing.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah, right, exactly
we would be sending into the void because
until we actually make up through these
boilerplates steps, all of which can fail.
We're not actually
talking to a browser yet,
we're only talking to the browser inside
this, after we've done the accept,
we've done the read, and
all that good stuff.
That's the only point where we can,
there's one more of these, fine.
Let's see if, yeah,
this is the problem with AI auto-complete.
Sometimes it hallucinates a helper
function you didn't actually write.
[LAUGH] but yeah, was that 413,
it's always fun to,
like, look up all
the different error codes.
All right, I guess I need to
ERR_404, ERR_413.
Content too large.
>> Richard Feldman: Okay, and
the right, great.
Okay, and then I guess we actually so
in this case, we don't necessarily need
to early return, because we might want
to just keep handling further requests.
Just because this one was too big,
that's no big deal.
But, yeah, this is basically like the
difference between error handling when we
don't have an active connection and don't
have a browser connection that we can like
actually send the response back to.
And when we're just still
kind of like starting up and
like trying to start up the server.
So, if any of these fail, like for
example, it's pretty easy to induce, say,
like, addresses and use.
So, if I leave this server running and
then I try to, like, do this again.
Was around 5, yeah examples exercise yeah.
So, it says, like,
bind failed address and use.
Would be a nicer example to give.
But yeah, this is the way you can actually
get this thing to not even make it to
the while loop.
The infinite loop, because it's like,
yeah, bind failed.
So, we're done, okay.
Now, as cool as this is so
we got our 404 here.
If we go to root, that works.
I can even like follow links cause this
takes us, that changes the URL to /blog,
which also works cause we
have /blog/inject.html.
All of that works great.
But we are missing an important piece
here, which is that I have strategically
chosen to make these things have no
images or CSS, or JavaScript whatsoever.
And the reason that I do that
is if let's say, for example,
I were taking the front-end
master's homepage,
which I've actually got right
here in a separate tab.
This is what our beautiful web server
does for the front-end master's homepage.
Now we do have one of these images kind of
works, but you notice that all the CSS and
all the JS and all that stuff.
It's just totally busted, and
also the image is totally busted.
This one's a little bit better.
That's kind of cool.
Everything's horrendous.
Why is everything horrendous?
Because all we are doing for
our requests, or sorry,
our response headers is we're
just doing HTP 1.1 200, okay.
We are not sending a single
response header whatsoever, and
the browser uses those headers like
content types specifically to figure out
like how to interpret this thing.
So, if I just send it a bunch of bytes and
I say, hey, this is a CSS file,
it's not gonna just be like, well that
is a dot CSS, I bet it's a CSS file.
No, it says like, no, you need to tell me
in a header how I'm supposed to interpret
these bytes that you've sent me.
And right now we're not doing that at all.
When it comes to the bare HTML,
it's gonna be fine with that.
But that's pretty much
where it draws the line.
So essentially, what we need to do is we
need to start actually sending response
headers, which is what we're gonna do
in the final section of the workshop.